README.md, before:

# flutter_pjsip

[![Build and test all](https://github.com/comagic/flutter_pjsip/actions/workflows/build-and-test.yaml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/comagic/flutter_pjsip/actions/workflows/build-and-test.yaml)

This is a Flutter plugin for the [PJSIP](https://www.pjsip.org/) library. It
provides a Dart API for the PJSIP library, and it is implemented using Dart FFI.

## Getting started as user

You can use this plugin as a user by adding it to your `pubspec.yaml`:

```bash
flutter pub add flutter_pjsip
```

Documentation for the API will be available later. TODO: Add link to API docs.

## Getting started as hacker

TODO: Move hacker's guide to separate document and add link to it here.

This project based on Flutter
[FFI plugin](https://docs.flutter.dev/development/platform-integration/c-interop),
a specialized package that includes native code directly invoked with Dart FFI.

## Melos magic

For simplicity we use [Melos](https://pub.dev/packages/melos) to manage
multi-package project. Melos is a Dart tool for managing Dart projects with
multiple packages, inspired by Lerna for JavaScript.

### Install melos

```bash
dart pub global activate melos
```

### Prepare the project for hacking: easy way

Before you start hacking, you need to prepare the project and install Android NDK - the minimum recommended version is 25.1.8937393. Make sure that you have Android SDK installed and `ANDROID_HOME` environment variable is set. Also you have to set `ANDROID_NDK_HOME` environment variable to the path to Android NDK.

By running the following command, melos will boostrap the project, get PJSIP source code, generate FFI bindings, and build PJSIP for all platforms:

```bash
melos prepare
```

### Prepare the project for hacking: step by step

Alternatively, you can execute prepare steps one by one. First, you need to install dependencies for all packages:

```bash
melos bs
```

Here `bs` means `bootstrap`.

Then you need to get PJSIP source code:

```bash
melos get-pjsip
```

Next step is to generate FFI bindings:

```bash
melos gen-ffi-bindings
```

Now you ready to build the project. You can build PJSIP for all platforms at once or for a specific platform:

```bash
# All platforms:
melos build
# iOS:
melos build-ios
# Android:
melos build-android
```

### Troubleshooting

#### Melos

If you have `Can't load Kernel binary: Invalid SDK hash.` error when running `melos` command, you need to run the following command:

```bash
dart pub global deactivate melos
dart pub global activate melos
```

This will reinstall melos and fix the issue.

#### Anroid NDK version

If you have `configure-android error: compiler not found, please check environment settings (TARGET ABI, etc)` error, make sure you have the minimum recommended version installed.

### Analyze and test all packages

Before committing your changes, you **should** run static analysis and all tests for all packages:

```bash
melos check-all
```

Alternatively, you can run static analysis and tests for all packages:

```bash
# Static analysis:
melos analyze
# Check code formatting:
melos check-format
# Tests:
melos test
```

Also you can run test separately:

```bash
# Dart tests (but there is no Dart tests yet):
melos test-dart
# Flutter tests
melos test-flutter
# Integration tests
melos test-integration
```

Intergation tests can be run **on one of you devices**! So, make sure that you have at least one device connected to your computer. If you have multiple devices connected, you can specify device ID (elsewise, you will get 'More than one device connected...' error).

```bash
melos test-integration -- -d iPhone
```

It can be applied to run other commands that includes `test-integration` command:

```bash
melos test -- -d iPhone
melos check-all -- -d iPhone
```

### Versioning and publish packages

Usually you don't need to version and publish packages manually. All heavy lifting is done by CI/CD. But if you need to do it manually, you can do it by running the following command:

```bash
# Bump version
melos version
# Publish packages
melos publish-with-hooks
```

Yeah, melos don't support hooks for publish command, so we need to use `publish-with-hooks` command instead, which runs `pre-publish.sh` and `post-publish.sh` scripts.

### Clean up everything

In case of any issues, you can clean up everything and start from scratch. This will clean up all packages and remove all generated files:

```bash
melos clean
```

You can also clean up working tree, but keep generated files (dart, binary libraries, etc):

```bash
melos clean-working-tree
```

This can be useful while preparing gh artifact or publishing packages.

## Project structure

We forced to move actual project to `packages/flutter_pjsip` folder because of Melos limitations (it's not compatible with the latest `file` package which is used by `ffi` package). So, we have the following structure:

- `/` - root folder with `melos.yaml` file
- `/scripts` - scripts for melos
- `/packages/flutter_pjsip` - actual project
- `/packages/flutter_pjsip/example` - example project

The actual project `flutter_pjsip` project uses the following structure:

- `src`: Contains the native source code, and a CmakeFile.txt file for building
  that source code into a dynamic library.

- `lib`: Contains the Dart code that defines the API of the plugin, and which
  calls into the native code using `dart:ffi`.

- platform folders (`android`, `ios`): Contains the build files
  for building and bundling the native code library with the platform application.

- `android/libs` and `ios/Frameworks`: Contains the native libraries and
  frameworks that are bundled with the platform application.

## Building and bundling native code

The `pubspec.yaml` specifies FFI plugins as follows:

```yaml
plugin:
  platforms:
    some_platform:
      ffiPlugin: true
```

This configuration invokes the native build for the various target platforms
and bundles the binaries in Flutter applications using these FFI plugins.

This can be combined with dartPluginClass, such as when FFI is used for the
implementation of one platform in a federated plugin:

```yaml
plugin:
  implements: some_other_plugin
  platforms:
    some_platform:
      dartPluginClass: SomeClass
      ffiPlugin: true
```

A plugin can have both FFI and method channels:

```yaml
plugin:
  platforms:
    some_platform:
      pluginClass: SomeName
      ffiPlugin: true
```

The native build systems that are invoked by FFI (and method channel) plugins are:

- For Android: Gradle, which invokes the Android NDK for native builds.
  - See the documentation in android/build.gradle.
- For iOS and MacOS: Xcode, via CocoaPods.
  - See the documentation in ios/flutter_pjsip.podspec.
  - See the documentation in macos/flutter_pjsip.podspec.
- For Linux and Windows: CMake.
  - See the documentation in linux/CMakeLists.txt.
  - See the documentation in windows/CMakeLists.txt.

## Binding to native code

To use the native code, bindings in Dart are needed.
To avoid writing these by hand, they are generated from the header file
(`src/flutter_pjsip.h`) by `package:ffigen`.
Regenerate the bindings by running `flutter pub run ffigen --config ffigen.yaml`.

## Invoking native code

Very short-running native functions can be directly invoked from any isolate.

Longer-running functions should be invoked on a helper isolate to avoid
dropping frames in Flutter applications.

## Flutter help

For help getting started with Flutter, view our
[online documentation](https://flutter.dev/docs), which offers tutorials,
samples, guidance on mobile development, and a full API reference.

Commit message:

feat: add create-lib-archive script and update README.md

README.md, after:

# flutter_pjsip

[![Build and test all](https://github.com/comagic/flutter_pjsip/actions/workflows/build-and-test.yaml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/comagic/flutter_pjsip/actions/workflows/build-and-test.yaml)

This is a Flutter plugin for the [PJSIP](https://www.pjsip.org/) library. It
provides a Dart API for the PJSIP library, and it is implemented using Dart FFI.

## Getting started as user

You can use this plugin as a user by adding it to your `pubspec.yaml`:

```bash
flutter pub add flutter_pjsip
```

Documentation for the API will be available later. TODO: Add link to API docs.

## Getting started as hacker

TODO: Move hacker's guide to separate document and add link to it here.

This project based on Flutter
[FFI plugin](https://docs.flutter.dev/development/platform-integration/c-interop),
a specialized package that includes native code directly invoked with Dart FFI.

## Melos magic

For simplicity we use [Melos](https://pub.dev/packages/melos) to manage
multi-package project. Melos is a Dart tool for managing Dart projects with
multiple packages, inspired by Lerna for JavaScript.

### Install melos

```bash
dart pub global activate melos
```

### Prepare the project for hacking: easy way

Before you start hacking, you need to prepare the project and install Android NDK - the minimum recommended version is 25.1.8937393. Make sure that you have Android SDK installed and `ANDROID_HOME` environment variable is set. Also you have to set `ANDROID_NDK_HOME` environment variable to the path to Android NDK.

By running the following command, melos will boostrap the project, get PJSIP source code, generate FFI bindings, and build PJSIP for all platforms:

```bash
melos prepare
```

### Prepare the project for hacking: step by step

Alternatively, you can execute prepare steps one by one. First, you need to install dependencies for all packages:

```bash
melos bs
```

Here `bs` means `bootstrap`.

Then you need to get PJSIP source code:

```bash
melos get-pjsip
```

Next step is to generate FFI bindings:

```bash
melos gen-ffi-bindings
```

Now you ready to build the project. You can build PJSIP for all platforms at once or for a specific platform:

```bash
# All platforms:
melos build
# iOS:
melos build-ios
# Android:
melos build-android
```

### Troubleshooting

#### Melos

If you have `Can't load Kernel binary: Invalid SDK hash.` error when running `melos` command, you need to run the following command:

```bash
dart pub global deactivate melos
dart pub global activate melos
```

This will reinstall melos and fix the issue.

#### Anroid NDK version

If you have `configure-android error: compiler not found, please check environment settings (TARGET ABI, etc)` error, make sure you have the minimum recommended version installed.

### Analyze and test all packages

Before committing your changes, you **should** run static analysis and all tests for all packages:

```bash
melos check-all
```

Alternatively, you can run static analysis and tests for all packages:

```bash
# Static analysis:
melos analyze
# Check code formatting:
melos check-format
# Tests:
melos test
```

Also you can run test separately:

```bash
# Dart tests (but there is no Dart tests yet):
melos test-dart
# Flutter tests
melos test-flutter
# Integration tests
melos test-integration
```

Intergation tests can be run **on one of you devices**! So, make sure that you have at least one device connected to your computer. If you have multiple devices connected, you can specify device ID (elsewise, you will get 'More than one device connected...' error).

```bash
melos test-integration -- -d iPhone
```

It can be applied to run other commands that includes `test-integration` command:

```bash
melos test -- -d iPhone
melos check-all -- -d iPhone
```

### Versioning and publish packages

Usually you don't need to version and publish packages manually. All heavy lifting is done by CI/CD. But if you need to do it manually, you can do it by running the following command:

```bash
# Bump version
melos version
# Publish packages
melos publish-with-hooks
```

Yeah, melos don't support hooks for publish command, so we need to use `publish-with-hooks` command instead, which runs `pre-publish.sh` and `post-publish.sh` scripts.

For creating an archive with compiled libraries, you can run the following command:

```bash
melos create-lib-archive
```

It will create `lib.tar.gz` archive in `packages/flutter_pjsip/target` folder. **Note**: this command doesn't build libraries, so you need to run `melos build` command before. This command is useful for creating github release artifact.

### Clean up everything

In case of any issues, you can clean up everything and start from scratch. This will clean up all packages and remove all generated files:

```bash
melos clean
```

You can also clean up working tree, but keep generated files (dart, binary libraries, etc):

```bash
melos clean-working-tree
```

This can be useful while preparing gh artifact or publishing packages.

## Project structure

We forced to move actual project to `packages/flutter_pjsip` folder because of Melos limitations (it's not compatible with the latest `file` package which is used by `ffi` package). So, we have the following structure:

- `/` - root folder with `melos.yaml` file
- `/scripts` - scripts for melos
- `/packages/flutter_pjsip` - actual project
- `/packages/flutter_pjsip/example` - example project

The actual project `flutter_pjsip` project uses the following structure:

- `src`: Contains the native source code, and a CmakeFile.txt file for building
  that source code into a dynamic library.

- `lib`: Contains the Dart code that defines the API of the plugin, and which
  calls into the native code using `dart:ffi`.

- platform folders (`android`, `ios`): Contains the build files
  for building and bundling the native code library with the platform application.

- `android/libs` and `ios/Frameworks`: Contains the native libraries and
  frameworks that are bundled with the platform application.

## Building and bundling native code

The `pubspec.yaml` specifies FFI plugins as follows:

```yaml
plugin:
  platforms:
    some_platform:
      ffiPlugin: true
```

This configuration invokes the native build for the various target platforms
and bundles the binaries in Flutter applications using these FFI plugins.

This can be combined with dartPluginClass, such as when FFI is used for the
implementation of one platform in a federated plugin:

```yaml
plugin:
  implements: some_other_plugin
  platforms:
    some_platform:
      dartPluginClass: SomeClass
      ffiPlugin: true
```

A plugin can have both FFI and method channels:

```yaml
plugin:
  platforms:
    some_platform:
      pluginClass: SomeName
      ffiPlugin: true
```

The native build systems that are invoked by FFI (and method channel) plugins are:

- For Android: Gradle, which invokes the Android NDK for native builds.
  - See the documentation in android/build.gradle.
- For iOS and MacOS: Xcode, via CocoaPods.
  - See the documentation in ios/flutter_pjsip.podspec.
  - See the documentation in macos/flutter_pjsip.podspec.
- For Linux and Windows: CMake.
  - See the documentation in linux/CMakeLists.txt.
  - See the documentation in windows/CMakeLists.txt.

## Binding to native code

To use the native code, bindings in Dart are needed.
To avoid writing these by hand, they are generated from the header file
(`src/flutter_pjsip.h`) by `package:ffigen`.
Regenerate the bindings by running `flutter pub run ffigen --config ffigen.yaml`.

## Invoking native code

Very short-running native functions can be directly invoked from any isolate.

Longer-running functions should be invoked on a helper isolate to avoid
dropping frames in Flutter applications.

## Flutter help

For help getting started with Flutter, view our
[online documentation](https://flutter.dev/docs), which offers tutorials,
samples, guidance on mobile development, and a full API reference.
